You were just telling me something that is one of the most ridiculous things
I've ever heard that you swam from Maui to Lanai.
Right? And you're the, one of the only humans to ever do that.
I am told I was the first person to swim for Maui to Lanai. And back.
The one way is a pretty famous swim race. That's done every year.
The first person to do it the round and go back. dude, why'd you do that?
How long you got.
It started? When I was a boy, they told me I couldn't do it. What,
what made you want to do that? That's a ridiculous proposition.
Um, so I got into, I decided in, it's going to sound silly.
I read a book in January of 2004, about this woman named penny Dean,
who, uh,
still to this day holds the record for the fastest crossing of the Catalina
channel. So it was filming from Catalina island to San Pedro or, or, uh, to, uh,
you typically swim to point point Vicenta and she had done it in like
seven hours and 20 minutes. And I was like, that's amazing.
I find that as a Crow flies, it's 21 miles with the currents.
It's a little longer. And I was like, you know, I really want to do this. Um,
but I, I got to learn how to swim perse. That.
Seems like three miles an hour swimming. She.
Is a phenom,
penny Dean had a stroke rate of 90 strokes per minute. Which, I mean,
that might not mean anything to someone who doesn't swim, but like to turn,
to have a hand hit the water, every, you know, third of it,
two thirds of a second is a remarkable gains. Yeah.
I can't hold a cadence of that for a hundred yards.
Wow. And she did it for 20 miles. Yeah.
What a beast she's out of control.
Yeah. There's certain people like that, man. That.
Yeah. I think, I think marathon swimming might be one sport. Where if,
if you just look at the numbers, I think women are better than men.
Um, well, there's that woman who swam from Cuba to the United States. Right.
She was the first person ever. And she didn't,
she do it like at a fairly advanced age.
Yeah. I mean,
she's of course got an amazing pedigree of swimming and this wasn't her first
rodeo.
Right, right, right. Why, why do you think women are better than men?
That's that?
I mean, those of us that I, I'm not a member of this community anymore,
but when I was, it was one of our favorite topics of discussion.
I think a thing opportunities or ideas that were put forth were higher pain
tolerance, something about being, you know,
evolving to be able to give birth, um,
just means they can tolerate pain a lot higher. Um,
I think another thing I've heard is buoyancy, you know,
women are naturally going to have more body fat, which provides insulation.
When you do these swims, you're not allowed any wetsuits or aids of any sort.
So shorts,
you're like you're in a Speedo and single latex cap and that's it.
And so if you can have a little,
and so I think women's hips because they're going to have more fat on their
hips. They, they,
it corrects one of the big buoyancy issues that we have in swimming. We,
we didn't evolve to swim. We're horrible at it naturally. Um,
because we swim like this, we drag our hips through the water.
And if you think about the importance of aerodynamics in most of the things that
we think about, whether it be archery or race, car driving, or cycling,
you know, in water,
it's that much more important because the density of water is, you know,
thousands of times greater than air.
So swimming is just a hundred percent about avoiding drag.
Wow. So, well, that totally makes sense. Um,
I just have been fascinated forever with people that are capable of
pushing their brain to do things that other people just don't think are
possible. Like, uh, you know, big foot, 200 race,
or like any of those things.
But the swim one is particularly crazy because you can't stop.
Right. Right.
Like if you're running an ultra marathon and you just want to sit down for a
couple of minutes and just take a break, you can do that.
But if you're swimming, there's no, you've got a thing you can do.
You could tread water is about as good as it gets,
but you can't touch the boat or the kayaker. It's an immediate disqualification.
Oh God, that's so crazy,
man. That is such a, wow. So you heard about this woman doing.
That's what I read this book and I was like,
I really want to do this at the time I was, uh,
I was actually in my residency in Baltimore and I was like, you know,
I really want to do this and I'm going to have to learn how to swim, to do it.
So I started taking swimming lessons and then, um,
I mean to make a very long story short, basically by about the summer of 2005,
I entered my first swim race, which was a two mile swim race in lake Reston,
Virginia. And I did it and I was like, oh my God,
I just swam two miles in the open water. You know, it was hard. But I was like,
okay, that's the proof of concept.
Now you just got to figure out how to make it 20, 25 miles. And, uh,
so I just, you know,
went completely psycho and ratcheted up the training. And,
and then in October of 2005, I did my first Catalina swim. Wow.
That's gotta be a pretty good feeling though.
When you're done that you are capable of pushing yourself to what most people
think is an impossible distance.
Yeah. I mean, people you asked a moment ago, why do you do this?
I would say that in life, um,
velocity means very little acceleration means everything.
So what do I mean by that? Right?
Like if you're going 650 miles an hour in an airplane,
you don't actually feel it. You only feel when speed changes. Right?
So I've always had this theory that emotionally that's also true.
Like happiness is only interesting when it's juxtaposed with sadness.
And so the feeling of crawling on the shore after you've been swimming for
12 to 14 hours is amazing.
But what makes it especially amazing is that six hours earlier,
you thought you were going to die.
So you start these swims in the middle of the night to avoid the shipping
traffic.
So that first swim boat drops you off at Catalina island. It's midnight,
that's a darkness. You can't imagine, like you can't even see LA from Catalina.
You have to swim for six hours before you even see the lights of Los Angeles.
Really? Yeah. What do you see?
The stars and the phospho, like bio luminescent organisms in the water.
Whoa. Which is incredible. I mean, that's worth the price of admission.
So every time your hand comes through the water,
you're pulling and ripping these little things and you're seeing the sparks and
you can't tell where the water ends in the sky starts. In other words,
the stars and the bioluminescence looks like one cylinder.
Wow. So for the first few hours, that's cool. But then, you know,
on my first swim, the water was incredibly rough. Um,
I had only swim in the ocean for two weeks before the swim.
I did all my training in a swimming pool. So in a lake on the east coast.
So now I work, I wasn't used to how to keep the salt water out of my mouth.
Right. So then I was like, puking my guts out. And then my, um.
While you were swimming. Yeah. Yeah. Does that.
Work? You just stop and puke and then keep swimming. Wow. And then,
uh, but then my tongue started to get really swollen from the salt water.
Because again, as I would learn later on,
I would go on to do many more of these swims.
But what I learned is the importance of spitting the water out of your mouth
very quickly. So in a, in a freshwater pool or lake, you get away with more,
but in the ocean, you swallow that salt water. You're going to get sick as hell.
So all this stuff's going on. So by five in the morning,
you've been swimming for five hours. You're getting cold.
You're I mean, you know, frankly, just physiologically,
like your cortisol levels are at an eight or you're just, you feel horrible.
It's like, it's a really bad feeling and you're not even halfway there.
And it's like, you don't know if you can do it and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
Well, if six hours later,
you're now crawling out of the water feeling like you've done this amazing thing
that that's emotional acceleration. That's like the greatest contrast.
Okay.
I know what you're saying. I mean, I've never experienced that,
but I was explaining the other day to a friend of mine about this,
a camping trip that we went on in Montana when it was like nine degrees outside,
it was freezing cold. We stayed out there for five, six days.
And then when we finally got to a hotel room,
I took a shower and it was the most amazing shower I've ever experienced in my
life. And that's a small.
Right? No, but you take a shower every day and it's like a big deal.
But when you do it in that setting or, or think about the, the meal you've had,
if you've been fast, similar situation.
Yeah. We're starving are lost at sea. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
I can't imagine that's a, so now that you've done,
how many of these have you done these crazy swim races or swim?
Call them several. Yeah. Usually these major, major ones are not racist.
You're on your own. You have to,
you go to the Federation that oversees that body of water and you say, Hey,
I want to do this. And then you, you know,
you go through all the channels to do it.
Like they have to have an observer there and they,
you follow these official rules that you.
Can be registered as someone who's actually completed.
It. Right. And someone's there to make sure you didn't, you know,
you did it correctly. Um, I don't know.
I've probably done all in probably like a dozen of these,
but probably like six of them really long ones. What's the longest.
Well, I, that's a good question.
The Maui one was 20 miles there and back. So 40 miles total.
The Maui channel is a 10 mile channel. So round trip is 20.
The bigger question is time in the water because you rarely get to swim these in
a straight line. So the Maui Lanai one, I wanted to go Maui, Lanai,
Molokai, Maui to do the triangle.
And that would have been 30 miles as a Crow flies, but we just, you know,
boat captain, wasn't willing to do it at night because of the tiger sharks.
And during the daytime,
we couldn't physiologically figure out how one could suffer
against those, the wind,
because the wind gets so brutal in the middle of the day.
So even the one that I did, which was just there and back,
I ended up swimming for 12 hours because on the
first way,
crossing where there was no wind took me four hours and then it took eight hours
to get back because I was swimming like the hypotenuse of a triangle, right?
Like the current's going this way.
So I had to swim this way just to go in a straight line. And I still can.
I almost missed Maui Jesus Christ.
So I almost got swept out to Molokai just because the current was about
1.7 knots, which is about as fast as I can swim. Maybe two knots.
That is a ridiculous thing, man. Why are you doing this? This is,
this has maniacal.
Well, I don't do it anymore. I mean, it was certainly a,
it was an amazing season of my life.
But I think once my daughter was born,
which was 10 years ago, this summer that's when I,
I only probably did two of these after she was born,
because then the training just got, so I just, you got to live in the water.
If you want to do this sport, like you got to eat including the winter.
You know, like, you know, even in San Diego where I live, it's still, you know,
55 degrees in the water and you're going to spend three,
four hours a day in the water freezing, you know, it was just, so that was like,
you know, I just don't have the,
the drive to spend 25 hours a week swimming.